Complex spending conditions how it works page (#1037)
BitcoinDesign/Guide: guide/how-it-works/custom-spending-conditions.md

After the wallet has been created, it needs to be registered on all of the involved signing devices. To do this, you will need the wallet descriptor, which is basically the “map” of the wallet. Each signing device needs to import this map to be able to sign transactions. This process is specific to each signing device and works in the same way as with regular multi-key wallets.

### Timelocks

Timelocks can be relative (e.g. “1 year after the wallet has been last used”) or absolute (e.g. “on January 3rd, 2024”). They can reach up to a maximum of 65535 blocks into the future, which is about 455 days.

##### Relative timelocks

An important aspect of timelocks is that they are applied to each [unspent transaction output (UTXO)](/guide/glossary/#unspent-transaction-output-utxo) in the wallet individually, not to the wallet as a whole. If a wallet uses relative timelocks, this means that the timelocks expire at different times for each UTXO, based on the time and date on which they were deposited into the wallet.

<div class="center" markdown="1">

{% include picture.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/custom-spending-conditions/unlock-status.png"

>    retina = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/custom-spending-conditions/uunlock-status@2x.png"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/custom-spending-conditions/unlock-status@2x.png"
```
One "u" too many (breaks the file display).

---
layout: guide
title: Custom Spending Conditions
description: An overview about advanced capabilities that enable users to create more flexible bitcoin wallets.
nav_order: 12
parent: How it works
permalink: /guide/how-it-works/custom-spending-conditions/
main_classes: -no-top-padding
image: /assets/images/guide/how-it-works/custom-spending-conditions/header.jpg
image_base: /assets/images/guide/how-it-works/custom-spending-conditions/

---

<!--

Editor's notes

This page focuses on the advanced wallet configurations which are enabled by Miniscript.

Header image source:
https://www.figma.com/file/qzvCvqhSRx3Jq8aywaSjlr/Bitcoin-Design-Guide-Illustrations-CO?type=design&node-id=3324%3A24043&mode=design&t=GbcNUdc0VUnSOQi2-1

-->

{% include picture.html
   image = "assets/images/guide/how-it-works/custom-spending-conditions/header.jpg"
   retina = "assets/images/guide/how-it-works/custom-spending-conditions/header@2x.jpg"
   alt-text = ""
   width = 1600
   height = 800
   layout = "full-width"
%}

> # Custom Spending Conditions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Custom spending conditions
```

{:.no_toc}
---

> Spending conditions encode the rules that need to be followed by a wallet to spend funds. Most bitcoin wallets have only one spending condition. For example, in a single-key wallet there is only one key that can sign transactions. Or, in a 2-of-3 multi-key wallet, you need any two of the three keys to sign transactions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Spending conditions encode the rules that need to be followed by a wallet to spend funds. Most bitcoin wallets have only one spending condition. For example, in a single-key wallet there is only one key that can sign transactions. Whereas in a 2-of-3 multi-key wallet, you need any two of the three keys to sign transactions.
```

In addition to these standard configurations it is also possible to create more flexible wallets by defining custom spending conditions. There is a wide variety of use cases, where this flexibility can be helpful, like personal or family self-custody, inheritance or company treasuries.

## Use case examples

#### Self-custody

> Custom spending conditions can be helpful to decrease the risk of losing funds in personal self-custody context. In a savings wallet context where you are the only key holder, you could unlock a recovery spending condition after a certain time of wallet inactivity. This condition could contain an additional key held in a different location. Such a setup does not decrease the wallet security, because the second key is locked under normal circumstances of using the wallet. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Custom spending conditions can be helpful to decrease the risk of losing funds in personal self-custody context. One example is in a savings wallet, wallet inactivity could unlock a recovery spending condition after a certain amount of time that a wallet is inactive. This condition could contain an additional key held in a different location. Such a setup does not decrease the wallet security, because the second key is locked under normal circumstances of using the wallet. 
```

Author: Agree that this sentence is sub-optimal currently. The suggestion still doesn't "sound" quite right. What do you think about something more tangible: 

"Custom spending conditions can be helpful to decrease the risk of losing funds in personal self-custody context.. **Let's say that you have a wallet that you use regularly on a weekly basis. You could unlock a recovery spending condition automatically if that wallet has not been used for more than six months, because it's likely that you have lost access to your primary key.** This condition could contain an additional key held in a different location.."

Author: I'd alm

```suggestion
Custom spending conditions can be helpful to decrease the risk of losing funds in personal self-custody context. Let's say that you have a wallet that you use regularly on a weekly basis. You could unlock a recovery spending condition automatically if that wallet has not been used for more than six months, because it's likely that you have lost access to your primary key. This condition could contain an additional key held in a different location. Such a setup does not decrease the wallet security, because the second key is locked under normal circumstances of using the wallet. 
```

Reviewer 2: This reads so much better. Really like it.

In a multi-key context, the recovery condition could require only one instead of two keys to spend funds after 6 months of inactivity. This will help mitigate the risk of loss of funds in case one key holder loses a key.

#### Company treasuries

> Custom spending conditions can also be useful in an organizational context. Companies need to make sure that they retain access to funds even if one or more employees lose their keys, are compromised or try to obstruct the deployment of funds. Or they might want to implement company-specific processes for corporate spending. For example, they would want to create a rule that the CFO must sign transactions for treasury management. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Custom spending conditions can also be useful in an organizational context. Companies need to make sure that they retain access to funds even if one or more employees lose their keys. It can also be to ensure that funds are not compromised or the deployment of funds is not obstructed. Or they might want to implement company-specific processes for corporate spending. For example, they would want to create a rule that the CFO must sign transactions for treasury management. 
```

Author: Counter proposal 🙂:

```suggestion
Custom spending conditions can also be useful in an organizational context. Companies need to make sure that they retain access to funds even if one or more employees lose their keys. Not only that, employees could also be compromised by a third party or try to obstruct the deployment of funds for their own benefit. Another use case is that a company needs to implement company-specific processes for corporate spending. For example, they would want to create a rule that the CFO must sign transactions for treasury management. 
```

Reviewer 2: Thumbs up for the counter proposal :-)

## Building blocks

There are currently two main building blocks that can help us construct custom spending conditions: timelocks and veto keys.

#### Timelocks

Timelocks use the passing of time to define additional rules for how funds can be spent from a wallet.

- Unlock additional spending conditions after a certain amount of time has passed.
- Restrict individual transactions to not be processed immediately but only at a certain point of time in the future (pre-signed transactions).

#### Veto keys

In a multi-key setup it is possible to define a key hierarchy. This means that you can define keys that are required in every transaction. This technique is sometimes also called a “sovereign veto”, as it grants the holder of a certain key the power to veto any transaction, even if the required amount of signatures would have been otherwise reached.

#### Powered by Miniscript

> Wallets that support these kinds of configurations typically rely on [Miniscript](/guide/glossary/#miniscript) to implement them. Miniscript is a simplified version of Bitcoin Script which helps to reduce the complexity of Bitcoin Script, the native programming language for Bitcoin. Miniscript is easier to read by developers, and also allows for various build-tools to help ensure that scripts are safe, valid, and efficient.

Reviewer: What are the alternatives to Miniscript? Just using regular Bitcoin Script? Or are there other ways?

This wallet has three layers of spending conditions and uses relative timelocks to unlock layers two and three: 

- **Condition 1 (primary):** The primary spending condition defines that two out of three keys are required to sign a transaction.
- **Condition 2 (recovery):** After 6 months of wallet inactivity, unlock a second spending condition which only requires one of the three keys to sign transactions.
- **Condition 3 (emergency):** After 12 months of wallet inactivity, unlock a third spending condition which activates a fourth key that is not part of the first two conditions.

<div class="center" markdown="1">

{% include picture.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/custom-spending-conditions/unlock-schedule.png"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/custom-spending-conditions/unlock-schedule@2x.png"
   mobile = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/custom-spending-conditions/unlock-schedule-mobile.png"
   mobileRetina = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/custom-spending-conditions/unlock-schedule-mobile@2x.png"
   alt-text = "An illustration showing the unlocking scheme of the spending conditions."
   width = 1600
   height = 800
%}

</div>

> One important thing to note is that the conditions are additive. This means that, once unlocked, any given condition remains active even if additional one gets unlocked. In the above scenario, you can sign a transaction with two keys (condition 1) but also with any one key after six months (condition 2).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One important thing to note is that previous conditions remain active and additional conditions are added to previous ones. This means that, once unlocked, any given condition remains active even if additional one gets unlocked. In the above scenario, you can sign a transaction with two keys (condition 1) but also with any one key after six months (condition 2).
```

Author: How about this? Would be shorter and more concise, I think. 

```suggestion
One important thing to note is that, once unlocked, spending conditions always remain active even if additional ones get unlocked. In the above scenario, you can sign a transaction with two keys (condition 1) but also with any one key after six months (condition 2).
```

Reviewer 2: Also reads much better.

## How it works

### Wallet creation and setup

> Similar to regular multi-key wallets, a software wallet application or coordination software initiates a multi-key wallet, choosing the number of total keys, and the number of keys required to sign transactions (called threshold). You then add public keys from other wallets generated elsewhere to the multisig after which the software wallet can complete the creation process. Please refer to the [Multi-key](/guide/how-it-works/private-key-management/multi-key/) page for a more detailed overview about how multi-key wallets work.

Reviewer: By `public keys`, do you mean [extended public keys](https://bitcoin.design/guide/glossary/#extended-public-key-xpub-ypub-zpub)? If so, you could add that in parentheses with a link to the glossary.

Notice that all conditions need to be configured during wallet creation. Therefore, you will need to have all public keys ready upfront. If you need to make any changes at a later point in time, you will need to create a new wallet with the desired configuration and move the funds to that wallet.

> After the wallet has been created, it needs to be registered on all of the involved signing devices. To do this, you will need the wallet descriptor, which is basically the “map” of the wallet. Each signing device needs to import this map to be able to sign transactions. This process is specific to each signing device and works in the same way as with regular multi-key wallets.

Reviewer: Can link `descriptor` to the [glossary](https://bitcoin.design/guide/glossary/#output-script-descriptor).

##### Relative timelocks

Relative timelocks can reach up to a maximum of 65535 blocks into the future, which is about 455 days. 

An important aspect of timelocks is that they are applied to each [unspent transaction output (UTXO)](/guide/glossary/#unspent-transaction-output-utxo) in the wallet individually, not to the wallet as a whole. If a wallet uses relative timelocks, this means that the timelocks expire at different times for each UTXO, based on the time and date on which they were deposited into the wallet.

<div class="center" markdown="1">

{% include picture.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/custom-spending-conditions/unlock-status.png"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/custom-spending-conditions/unlock-status@2x.png"
   mobile = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/custom-spending-conditions/unlock-status-mobile.png"
   mobileRetina = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/custom-spending-conditions/unlock-status-mobile@2x.png"
   alt-text = "An illustration showing the status of which spending conditions are available for each UTXO."

>    caption = "Figure 2"

Reviewer: There's mention of a Figure 2 on the page, but not of a Figure 1. Might be easier to just state "in the image". People will know it's the one right next to the text.

{% include tip/close.html %}

**To reset a relative timelock or “refresh” a UTXO, you need to spend that UTXO.** This can be achieved through a self-transfer to a new address within the same wallet. Wallet applications can make this process easy for users by implementing the corresponding functionality.

Note that an on-chain transaction is required to reset a timelock, along with the respective transaction fees. This can become costly if you have many UTXOs in the wallet. Therefore, it is recommended to consolidate smaller amounts into larger UTXOs in order to reduce the costs of resetting timelocks.

#### Absolute timelocks

Absolute timelocks use a specific calendar date or block height as their reference point. In contrast to relative timelocks, absolute timelocks can go out as far as you want (the technical limit is 500 million blocks). 

> Absolute timelocks apply the same timelock is for each UTXO in the wallet. This has the advantage that they expire for all UTXOs in the wallet at the same time. This means that users only have to keep track of one deadline, which can make the management of the wallet easier and less demanding.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Absolute timelocks apply the same timelock for each UTXO in the wallet. This has the advantage that they expire for all UTXOs in the wallet at the same time. This means that users only have to keep track of one deadline, which can make the management of the wallet easier and less demanding.
```

#### Do

- **Provide real-world examples or templates** for common setups to help users choose and implement the right configuration for their needs.
- **Provide informational content to help users guide through the setup process** and educate them about how to properly use a time-based wallet. They can be powerful tools to achieve very robust setups. However, with an increasing number of conditions, setups become complex very quickly, which might actually decrease their security.
- **Educate users that composing condition layers is only one aspect of their setup.** Make them aware that they should think through the adjacent topics before implementing a specific scheme. These topics include aspects like the trust relationships with other users, key backups and wallet configuration backups. The more layers people use, the more complicated the entire setup gets.
- **If possible, provide a way to save unfinished wallet configurations during the setup process.** As the creation process may involve many steps and/or users might not have all the necessary signing keys available, they would need to start from scratch at a different point in time, which could cause frustration.

> - **Use Taproot in your product**, as it adds many privacy benefits to the users, especially in a multi-sig context. First, using multi-sig on its own reduces the anonymity set. Taproot helps mitigate this aspect, because only the executed part is revealed on-chain. Second, spending conditions that are not used in a Taproot transaction are not revealed on-chain. This means that inactive keys or conditions cannot be detected through chain-surveillance tools. Third, Taproot transactions have a smaller on-chain footprint. Therefore, they are more economical.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Use Taproot in your product**, as it adds many privacy benefits to the users, especially in a multi-key context. First, using multi-key on its own reduces the anonymity set. Taproot helps mitigate this aspect, because only the executed part is revealed on-chain. Second, spending conditions that are not used in a Taproot transaction are not revealed on-chain. This means that inactive keys or conditions cannot be detected through chain-surveillance tools. Third, Taproot transactions have a smaller on-chain footprint. Therefore, they are more economical.
```
The rest of the page uses "multi-key".

Can also link Taproot to the [address page in the glossary](https://bitcoin.design/guide/glossary/address/#taproot-address---p2tr).
